VCU Life Sciences
Bioinformatics (BNFO)
BNFO 101. Introduction to Scientific Computing. 1 Hour.
Semester course; 1 lecture hour. 1 credit. Enrollment is restricted to
bioinformatics majors. This course will introduce students to basic
principles and skills for using a computer to solve scientific problems.
It is hands-on course and does not assume any special prior knowledge
or skill with computers. Students completing the course will become
familiar with and develop skills and practical knowledge of how to use
common computer-based command-line tools and systems critical for
effective scientific computing.
BNFO 125. Disease and Human Ancestry. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course introduces
the role that disease has played in human existence. A key part of this
understanding comes from new DNA sequencing and genomic data
analysis tools that provide information about our ancestry and origin,
as well as about the ancestry and history of disease organisms that
have co-evolved with us. The vast amount of new data has opened
controversial doors to social and ethical implications, such as questions
of race and discrimination, and teach us how to fight emerging disease
at local and global levels. This course will discuss these topics through
case examples of different diseases from parasites (e.g., malaria),
bacteria (e.g., bubonic plague, tuberculosis and syphilis) and viruses (e.g.,
smallpox, influenza and AIDS).
BNFO 191. Special Topics in Bioinformatics. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated for
a maximum total of nine credits, with the provision that no more than
nine combined credits of BNFO 191 and BNFO 193 can apply toward
graduation. An introductory, detailed study of a selected topic in
bioinformatics unavailable as an existing course. If multiple topics are
offered, students may elect to take more than one. Adviser's approval is
required for counting each special topics course toward meeting specific
requirements of the B.S. program.
BNFO 193. Special Topics in Bioinformatics. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated for
a maximum total of nine credits, with the provision that no more than
nine combined credits of BNFO 191 and BNFO 193 can apply toward
graduation. An introductory, detailed study of a selected topic in
bioinformatics unavailable as an existing course. If multiple topics are
offered, students may elect to take more than one. Adviser's approval is
required for counting each special topics course toward meeting specific
requirements of the B.S. program. Graded as pass/fail.
BNFO 201. Computing Skills and Concepts for Bioinformatics. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: MATH 151
or 200 with a minimum grade of C, or satisfactory score on the VCU
Mathematics Placement Test within the one-year period immediately
preceding the beginning of the course. An introduction to computation
in bioinformatics, including basics of data representation, and computer
organization, as well as programming in Python or other appropriate
scripting language. Bioinformatics applications in the literature will be
discussed. Guest speakers will share bioinformatics career experiences
and opportunities.
BNFO 251. Phage Discovery I. 2 Hours.
Semester course; 4 laboratory hours. 2 credits. Corequisite: BIOL 151 or
152. An exploratory laboratory where students will purify phage from soil,
visualize phage using electron microscopy and isolate genomic material
for nucleic acid sequencing. Registration by override only.
BNFO 252. Phage Discovery II. 2 Hours.
Semester course; 4 laboratory hours. 2 credits. Corequisite: BIOL 151
or 152. An exploratory laboratory where students will learn about
the genomes of viruses infecting bacteria. Students will be given the
genome sequence of a novel virus, which will be the basis for a series of
computer-based analyses to understand the biology of the virus and to
compare it with other viruses that infect the same host. Registration by
override only.
BNFO 291. Special Topics in Bioinformatics. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated for
a maximum total of nine credits, with the provision that no more than
nine combined credits of BNFO 291 and BNFO 293 can apply toward
graduation. An introductory, detailed study of a selected topic in
bioinformatics unavailable as an existing course. If multiple topics are
offered, students may elect to take more than one. Adviser's approval is
required for counting each special topics course toward meeting specific
requirements of the B.S. program.
BNFO 292. Independent Study. 1-2 Hours.
Semester course; variable hours. 1-2 credits. May be repeated for a
maximum total of 6 credits. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. A
course designed to provide an opportunity for independent readings of
the bioinformatics literature under supervision of a staff member.
BNFO 293. Special Topics in Bioinformatics. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated for
a maximum total of nine credits, with the provision that no more than
nine combined credits of BNFO 291 and BNFO 293 can apply toward
graduation. An introductory, detailed study of a selected topic in
bioinformatics unavailable as an existing course. If multiple topics are
offered, students may elect to take more than one. Adviser's approval is
required for counting each special topics course toward meeting specific
requirements of the B.S. program. Graded as pass/fail.
BNFO 300. Molecular Biology Through Discovery. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. The course aims to
expand students' "ignorance,
" a prerequisite for success in science, by
confronting them with the interface between the known and the unknown,
stressing the process by which the boundary is traversed. It will do so
using as the raw material the study of molecular biology, an essential
groundwork for bioinformatics.
BNFO 301. Introduction to Bioinformatics. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisites: BNFO 201
or permission of instructor. The course will present a practical and
theoretical introduction to the tools and techniques needed to obtain
and interpret a variety of genome-related data types. The course will
include several bioinformatic methods underlying nucleotide and protein
sequence alignment, statistical methods for data visualization in R, the
types of experimental results commonly encountered in bioinformatics
data analysis and the public databases where these data can be
accessed.
BNFO 315. Effective Communication in the Sciences. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. How do we tell our science
as a story? This course will explore ways to share science with fellow
scientists and the public, including best practices for presenting data,
simplifying complex ideas for presentations and sharing science in an
accurate and ethical way in different media. Students will experience a
hands-on approach to scientific writing and storytelling and hear from
guest speakers from varying backgrounds in scientific communication.
Communicating about science is an important part of being published,
securing funding and building awareness around interests and this
course is a first step to honing those skills.
VCU Undergraduate Bulletin 2023-24 885
BNFO 380. Introduction to Mathematical Biology. 4 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture and 2 laboratory hours. 4 credits.
Prerequisites: MATH 200 and BIOL 151, both with a minimum grade of
C, or permission of instructor. An introduction to mathematical biology.
Various mathematical modeling tools will be covered and implemented
in a range of biological areas. Additionally, the collaborative research
process will be presented and discussed. Crosslisted as: MATH 380.
BNFO 391. Special Topics in Bioinformatics. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated for
a maximum total of nine credits, with the provision that no more than
nine combined credits of BNFO 391 and BNFO 393 can apply toward
graduation. A detailed study of a selected topic in bioinformatics
unavailable as an existing course. If multiple topics are offered,
students may elect to take more than one. Adviser's approval is required
for counting each special topics course toward meeting specific
requirements of the B.S. program.
BNFO 393. Special Topics in Bioinformatics. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated for
a maximum total of nine credits, with the provision that no more than
nine combined credits of BNFO 391 and BNFO 393 can apply toward
graduation. An introductory, detailed study of a selected topic in
bioinformatics unavailable as an existing course. If multiple topics are
offered, students may elect to take more than one. Adviser's approval is
required for counting each special topics course toward meeting specific
requirements of the B.S. program. Graded as pass/fail.
BNFO 411. Ethical Issues in Life Sciences. 2 Hours.
Semester course; 2 lecture hours. 2 credits. This course will introduce
fundamentals in ethical conduct with a focus on interdisciplinary
application to the life sciences, with attention paid to the design,
collection, analysis and dissemination of bioinformatic datasets. Graded
as pass/fail.
BNFO 420. Applications in Bioinformatics. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 2 lecture and 2 laboratory hours. 3 credits.
Prerequisites: CMSC 245 or 255 and BNFO 301. Capstone course.
Students will integrate biological, computational and quantitative skills to
complete bioinformatics projects in a professional team-problem-solving
context. Course includes explicit instruction in the conduct of research
as well as a review of applicable strategies, methods and technologies.
Written and oral presentation is emphasized, with systematic feedback
and practice opportunities provided.
BNFO 440. Computational Methods in Bioinformatics. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 2 lecture and 2 laboratory hours. 3 credits.
Prerequisites: CMSC 255 and 256; BNFO 301, or permission of instructor.
An introduction to mathematical and computational methods in
bioinformatics analysis. Topics include but are not limited to operating
systems, interfaces, languages, SQL, search algorithms, string
manipulation, gene sequencing, simulation and modeling, and pattern
recognition. Students will be exposed to Maple, Matlab, SPSS, E-cell,
BioPerl, Epigram and C as part of the requirements of this course.
BNFO 451. Genomic Medicine. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: BIOL 300.
Genomic medicine is a clinical approach to diagnose and treat patients
based on testing that includes an individual’s genomic information. This
course will provide an introduction to this emerging field and its potential
to improve the diagnosis, prevention and treatment of disease. Topics
will include key genomic technologies and the computational approaches
used to probe genomic data as applied to real clinical examples. The
ethical, legal and societal issues in genomic medicine will be explored.
This course is geared toward students with a general biology background.
BNFO 491. Special Topics in Bioinformatics. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated for
a maximum total of 12 credits, with the provision that no more than
12 combined credits of BNFO 491 and BNFO 493 can apply toward
graduation. A detailed study of a selected topic in bioinformatics
unavailable as an existing course. If multiple topics are offered,
students may elect to take more than one. Adviser's approval is required
for counting each special topics course toward meeting specific
requirements of the B.S. program.
BNFO 492. Independent Study. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; variable hours. A minimum of three hours of supervised
activity per week per credit is required. 1-4 credits. May be repeated
for a maximum total of 6 credits. Prerequisite: BIOL 218. Projects
should include data collection and analysis, learning bioinformatics-
related research techniques, and mastering experimental procedures, all
under the direct supervision of a faculty member. A final report must be
submitted at the completion of the project. Graded as pass/fail.
BNFO 493. Special Topics in Bioinformatics. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated for
a maximum total of 12 credits, with the provision that no more than
12 combined credits of BNFO 491 and BNFO 493 can apply toward
graduation. A detailed study of a selected topic in bioinformatics
unavailable as an existing course. If multiple topics are offered,
students may elect to take more than one. Adviser's approval is required
for counting each special topics course toward meeting specific
requirements of the B.S. program. Graded as pass/fail.
BNFO 496. Undergraduate Teaching Assistantship in Bioinformatics. 1-2
Hours.
Semester course; 1-2 field experience hours. 1-2 credits. May be repeated
for a maximum total of two credits. Enrollment requires permission of
instructor and a minimum grade of B in the course the student will TA.
Student will work with course instructor to implement course objectives.
Typical duties involve media preparation, answering questions, providing
feedback on course assignments and peer mentoring. Provides exposure
to the practice, possibilities, rewards and responsibilities of the act of
teaching. Graded as pass/fail.
BNFO 497. Research and Thesis. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; variable hours. A minimum of three hours of supervised
activity per week per credit is required. 1-4 credits. May be repeated for
a maximum total of 6 credits. Prerequisites: BIOL 218, junior or senior
status. Projects should include data collection and analysis, learning
bioinformatics-related research techniques, and mastering experimental
procedures, all under the direct supervision of a faculty member. A written
thesis of substantial quality is required at the completion of the research.
Environmental Studies (ENVS)
ENVS 101. Introduction to Environmental Studies I. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Enrollment is restricted to
environmental studies majors. Study of contemporary issues related to
environmental studies including sustainability, biological conservation,
global change and an overview of the core earth systems.
ENVS 102. Introduction to Environmental Studies II. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: ENVS 101 or
permission of instructor. Enrollment is restricted to environmental studies
majors. Studies of contemporary issues related to government policy and
environmental issues at local to international scales.
886 Undergraduate courses
ENVS 105. Physical Geology. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. A descriptive approach to
physical geology dealing with the history and structure of the earth,
catastrophic events and geology as it relates to the contemporary
environment. An optional laboratory, ENVZ 105, may be taken with this
course.
ENVS 201. Earth System Science. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. An introduction to the
processes of and linkages among the major systems that drive planet
Earth. The biosphere, geosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere and
sociosphere are presented as dynamic and interdependent systems.
ENVS 222. Electronic Portfolios. 1 Hour.
Semester course; 1 lecture hour (delivered online). 1 credit. This online
course will guide individuals in developing an electronic portfolio
consisting of student-curated collections of specific academic work,
bibliographic information and a curriculum vitae used throughout their
academic career. Graded as pass/fail.
ENVS 260. Outdoor Leadership. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course is designed
to provide an introduction to the concepts and skills needed to work
and lead teams in outdoor settings. Topics include the historical and
philosophical foundations of outdoor leadership, outdoor teaching and
facilitation, safety and risk management, and environmental stewardship.
The course includes classroom and field application components.
ENVS 265. Paths to Environmental Leadership. 2 Hours.
Semester course; 2 lecture hours. 2 credits. Prerequisites: ENVS 101
and ENVS 102, both with a minimum grade of B. This course focuses
on personal leadership development, leadership in the field of
environmental studies, grant writing and revision, and the peer-review
process. Discussions with guest speakers who are leaders in various
environmental fields, additional readings and self-directed exploration
of leadership figures will broaden our understanding of environmental
leadership. Students will then use the Udall Undergraduate Scholarship
application as a tool to begin to develop their own vision of environmental
leadership and develop experience in grant writing and peer review.
ENVS 291. Special Topics in Environmental Studies. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated
with different topics for a maximum of 12 credits. An introductory
investigation into a selected topic salient to environmental studies. See
the Schedule of Classes for specific topics being offered each semester.
ENVS 300. Sustainable Societies: James River Basin. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course explores the 25
most critical social, economic and environmental issues in the region
in a global context. It examines how people are tackling the issues of
sustainably and turning them into opportunities.
ENVS 301. Introduction to Meteorology. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. An introductory course
designed to provide the student with an overview of the structures and
processes that cause weather. These include atmospheric circulations
and the weather patterns that we observe. Emphasis will be placed upon
the tracking and display of weather phenomena, as well as their forecast
movement and impact.
ENVS 310. Introduction to Oceanography. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. An introductory course
designed to provide the student with an overview of the structures
and processes of the world's oceans. These include the systems that
impact the oceans: the hydrosphere, the atmosphere, the geosphere,
the biosphere and the sociosphere. Emphasis will be placed upon
hands-on techniques for understanding these systems, including online
simulations and in-class activities.
ENVS 311. Politics of the Environment. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. An exploration of the current
controversy about environmental politics and the issues and crises it
centers on. Special attention will be given to the constitutional, political
and geographical factors in the development of environmental policy and
the organized effort to deal with governmental actions and inaction and
its impact on policy outcomes. Crosslisted as: POLI 311.
ENVS 314. Human-Environment Interactions: Foundations and
Applications. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. A comparative study
of the ecology and natural history of human populations, including
the environments as determining factors in the evolution of human
institutions and technology, resources management, and population
crises; cultural traditions as mechanisms of population control; basic
theory of population biology. Crosslisted as: INTL 314.
ENVS 315. Energy and the Environment. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Enrollment restricted to
non-physics majors with junior or senior standing; not applicable to the
physics major. A study of society's demands for energy, how it is currently
being met, the environmental consequences thereof and some discussion
of alternatives. Crosslisted as: PHYS 315.
ENVS 321. Cartography. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: MATH 131,
STAT 208, or higher level MATH or STAT course. This course provides
an introduction to the art and science behind the presentation of spatial
information using maps and charts. Students will develop visual thinking
and communication skills while applying cartographic theory to address
contemporary practical problems. Students must have a laptop able to
run ArcGIS Online.
ENVS 330. Environmental Pollution. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisites: BIOL 151 and
BIOL 152. The study of pollution in the environment with emphasis on the
procedures for detection and abatement.
ENVS 332. Environmental Management. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: URSP 204. An
interdisciplinary review of domestic and international environmental
problems and their underlying causes, current management frameworks,
alternative management approaches and strategies, and barriers to
their implementation. Other topics include: environmental history and
economics, population growth, natural resources use, biodiversity,
pollution. Crosslisted as: URSP 332.
ENVS 335. Environmental Geology. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: ENVS 105
or URSP 204. The relationship between humankind and the physical
environment, earth materials and processes, geological hazards, water,
mineral and energy resources, land use, and environmental health and
law.
ENVS 343. Data Literacy. 4 Hours.
Semester course; 4 lecture hours. 4 credits. Prerequisites: ENVS 102
and STAT 210. This course takes a hands-on, collaborative approach for
students to develop proficiency in the application of data management
skills, static and dynamic data visualization, and quantitative analyses of
environmental and geospatial datasets. Students will be required to bring
their own laptop and analyses and visualization will be performed using
the R statistical programming language.
ENVS 355. Water. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: BIOL 317 or
ENVS 330 or permission of instructor. The course takes an ecosystem
approach to understanding the functioning of streams, rivers, lakes,
estuaries and oceans. The course complements curricula in biology and
environmental studies and is specifically geared toward students with an
interest in the water resources profession.
ENVS 360. Outdoor Programming and Event Management. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course is designed
to provide students with information and practical experience required
to successfully design, promote, implement and evaluate outdoor
experiential programming across a range of contexts.
ENVS 361. Outdoor Team Building and Group Facilitation. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course is designed
to provide students with the theory and practice of developing and
deploying a successful outdoor recreational, educational, interpretive
or adventure experience. In doing so, students will learn about group
dynamics, team building, risk management and inquiry-based learning
techniques.
ENVS 368. Nature Writing. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: ENGL 201,
ENGL 202, ENGL 203, ENGL 204, ENGL 205, ENGL 206, ENGL 211,
ENGL 215, ENGL 217, ENGL 236, ENGL 250, ENGL 291, ENGL 295 or
NEXT 240. A study of the literary genre of nature writing in English.
Crosslisted as: ENGL 368.
ENVS 370. Applications of Conservation Science. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: ENVS 343.
The field of conservation science is focused on protecting biodiversity
through the promotion of both social and ecological processes. This
course will provide a foundation in the real-world applications of
conservation science and demonstrate how data are essential to
effective conservation of natural resources.
ENVS 391. Special Topics in Environmental Studies. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated with
different topics for a maximum of 12 credits. A detailed investigation into
a selected topic salient to environmental studies. See the Schedule of
Classes for specific topics being offered each semester.
ENVS 401. Meteorology and Climatology. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. Prerequisite: PHYS 201 or PHYS 207.
A basic, semiquantitative course in the elements of weather and climate,
their driving forces and their spatial and temporal distribution and
variability. Atmospheric motions and circulation, weather forecasting,
human impact on weather and climate.
ENVS 411. Oceanography. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisites: BIOL 151,
BIOL 152 and CHEM 102. A basic course in the physical, chemical and
geological properties of oceans and ocean basins. Origin and character of
ocean basins, properties of oceanic waters, oceanic circulation, land-sea
interactions, marine environments and ecology.
VCU Undergraduate Bulletin 2023-24 887
ENVS 421. Environmental Data Visualization. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: STAT 314. This
is an introductory course in using databases and geospatial technology.
The course will introduce students to computer technology, project
development and management skills, database management skills, and
geospatial technology. Students will use in-class applied environmental
analyses to guide skill-set development. The course will introduce the
students to working with data in various formats and using the ArcGIS
software suite to visualize the data. Students will be introduced to
Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Access, ESRI ArcGIS software suite and ESRI
ArcGIS Online.
ENVS 430. Invasive Species Management. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 1 lecture and 2 field experience hours. 3 credits.
Prerequisite: BIOL 317. This course explores the ecological, political and
regulatory issues surrounding invasive species in the city of Richmond
and the commonwealth of Virginia. Students will be introduced to the
James River Park System habitat restoration plan, a long-term strategy
to manage non-native invasive species. Individuals will work directly with
environmental professionals, park personnel and community partners to
restore natural areas.
ENVS 460. Wilderness First Responder. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course is intended
for anyone working in a position of leadership in an outdoor setting
or for individuals who want a high level of wilderness medical training
for working in remote field settings, extended personal backcountry
trips or expeditions. The course is a comprehensive and in-depth look
at the standards and skills of dealing with response and assessment,
musculoskeletal injuries, environmental emergencies and survival skills,
soft tissue injuries, and medical emergencies. Additional topics, such
as CPR, are also included. Wilderness First Responder training is the
industry standard for those who work as government and nongovernment
field technicians, backcountry trip leaders, camp counselors, mountain
guides, river guides and ski patrollers.
ENVS 461. Wilderness Policy and Practice. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 2 lecture and 1 field experience hours. 3 credits. This
course takes a multidisciplinary and experiential look at the concept of
wilderness. Learning spans from the classroom to a first-hand wilderness
experience, and materials include environmental law, natural resources
management, environmental philosophy and ethics, regional and local
history, and conservation science. Throughout students will focus on the
intersection between society, biodiversity and the wilderness concept in
principle and practice.
ENVS 490. Research Seminar in Environmental Studies. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisites: senior
standing and at least 12 hours of approved environmental studies course
work. An interdisciplinary examination of problems and issues central
to environmental studies. Environmental research of VCU faculty will
be reviewed, and selected local environmental problems will be studied.
Each student will complete a research project focusing on a specific
environmental question.
ENVS 491. Topics in Environmental Studies. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated with
different topics for a maximum of 12 credits. An in-depth study of a
selected environmental topic. See the Schedule of Classes for specific
topics to be offered each semester and prerequisites.
ENVS 492. Independent Study. 1-3 Hours.
Semester course; variable hours. Variable credit. Maximum of 3 credits
per semester; maximum total of 6 credits for all topics courses.
Prerequisite: junior or senior standing, and permission of instructor.
888 Undergraduate courses
ENVS 493. Environmental Studies Internship. 1-3 Hours.
Semester course; variable hours. 1-3 credits per semester. Maximum total
of 6 credits. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing, and permission of
instructor. Graded as pass/fail.
ENVS 499. Environmental Studies Capstone Experience. 0 Hours.
Semester course; variable hours. 0 credits. Corequisite: ENVS 490,
ENVS 491 (when topics implement core competencies required for a
capstone experience and are approved by the director of the Center for
Environmental Studies), ENVS 492 or ENVS 493. Enrollment restricted to
students who have completed 90 hours of undergraduate course work.
Any of the corequisite courses qualify as a capstone experience if taken
with this course. Graded as pass/fail.
Environmental Studies Lab (ENVZ)
ENVZ 105. Physical Geology Laboratory. 1 Hour.
Semester course; 2 laboratory hours. 1 credit. Pre- or corequisite:
ENVS 105, an optional laboratory course consisting of experiments and
activities related to ENVS 105.
ENVZ 335. Environmental Geology Laboratory. 1 Hour.
Semester course; 2 laboratory hours. 1 credit. Corequisite: ENVS 335.
Required for environmental science majors enrolled in ENVS 335; optional
for other majors. Attendance on one Saturday morning field trip required.
Laboratory exercises coordinated with ENVS 335 lectures.
ENVZ 401. Meteorology and Climatology Laboratory. 1 Hour.
Semester course; 3 laboratory hours. 1 credit. Pre- or corequisite:
ENVS 401. A series of laboratory and field experiments designed to
quantify the elements of weather and climate and to interpret their local
temporal and spatial variations.
Life Sciences (LFSC)
LFSC 101. Academic and Career Options in Life Sciences. 1 Hour.
Semester course; 1 lecture hour. 1 credit. Students interested in the life
sciences at VCU are faced with an enormous variety of academic options
from bioinformatics and biomedical engineering to exercise science
and nursing. Students outside of these programs have post-graduate
opportunities in the life sciences, such as health care administration and
government policy. This course will introduce students to an overview of
all of the academic programs in life sciences available at VCU and their
associated potential career options. Graded as pass/fail.
LFSC 191. Special Topics in Integrative Life Sciences. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated
for credit with different topics. A 100-level study of a selected topic
in integrative life sciences. Students will find specific topics and
prerequisites for each special topics course listed in the Schedule of
Classes. If multiple topics are offered, students may elect to take more
than one.
LFSC 301. Integrative Life Sciences Research. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 2 lecture and 1 recitation hours. 3 credits. Pre- or
corequisite: UNIV 200 or HONR 200. Students will leave this course
knowing enough about science and the process of science to feel
confident in critically evaluating scientific information and/or embarking
on their own process of discovery with a faculty mentor. They will gain an
appreciation of the interdisciplinary and complex nature of life sciences
and will hone their critical thinking about how science interacts with and
informs society.
LFSC 307. Community Solutions: Multiple Perspectives. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: PSYC 101.
Explores possibilities for addressing social concerns of the Richmond
community by understanding the complex nature of social issues as
essential to their successful amelioration via perspectives of life and
social sciences. Toward this end, expertise from the social sciences,
the life sciences and the community are integrated. Includes a service-
learning experience (a 20-hour volunteer requirement). Crosslisted as:
PSYC 307.
LFSC 391. Special Topics in Integrative Life Sciences. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated
for credit with different topics. A 300-level study of a selected topic
in integrative life sciences. Students will find specific topics and
prerequisites for each special topics course listed in the Schedule of
Classes. If multiple topics are offered, students may elect to take more
than one.
LFSC 401. Faith and Life Sciences. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: UNIV 200 or
HONR 200. Open to students of any school or program. Explores the
complex relationships between faith traditions and the life sciences.
Topics include epistemology, impact of life sciences on ideas of fate
and responsibility, limits of science and technology, and scientific and
religious perspectives on human origins, consciousness, aggression,
forgiveness, health, illness and death. Crosslisted as: RELS 401.
LFSC 491. Special Topics in Integrative Life Sciences. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated
for credit with different topics. A 400-level study of a selected topic
in integrative life sciences. Students will find specific topics and
prerequisites for each special topics course listed in the Schedule of
Classes. If multiple topics are offered, students may elect to take more
than one.